Hi, everybody.
My name is Xavier Legro,
and I'm the Mac OS X evangelist
in developer relations.
And I'd like to welcome
you to session 404,
Unicode for Japanese, Chinese,
and Everything Else!.
I had to look at the title.
It's kind of long.
Before we start with this session,
where we have great content,
we're going to give you an update
on what we've been doing with
regards to Unicode in Panther.
I'd like to take just a moment,
because yesterday night--I don't
know if you went--but we had the
Meet the Evangelist event downstairs.
And I represent a lot of technologies
on Mac OS X to developers,
but most of the time,
I get a lot of questions on, "Well,
why should I use Unicode?
Why, as a developer,
should I really focus on using Hatsui,
or using the Cocoa layout engine,
or using MLT?
Why do I need to use Unicode
in my application?" And that
was very interesting,
because it seems still a lot
of developers don't understand
all the benefits with Unicode.
We've been talking about it
since the beginning of Mac OS X.
We had sessions for the last three years.
But let me give you just
a quick rundown on why,
as a developer,
you should really focus and use Unicode
as much as possible in your application.
First,
if you're a CDK developer and you're
developing an application for China,
Japan, or Korea,
you just have to do it now.
Apple has been investing a lot of money
and effort in our Japanese support,
for instance,
and the only way you can take
advantage of some of the features
we're going to be talking today,
like, for instance,
accessing the 32,000 glyphs
that we have in Hiragino,
is by using Unicode.
But then, second,
it's important for you to
understand that Unicode is where,
actually,
Apple is putting all its efforts.
We're not doing any more things.
We're not supporting any new
languages in Word Script.
And for you,
you have to see that as a way
of evolving your application.
So please take good note of all
the content of these sessions.
We have brand-new features for our
customers in the CDK countries.
And for that, I'd like to invite on
stage Deborah Goldsmith.
who's the manager of a font
and is the UniCode liaison
with the UniCode consortium.
Deborah.
DEBORAH GILLETT: Thank you, Xavier.
Good afternoon, everyone.
Today we're going to talk
about Unicode and Mac OS X.
So here's a quick introduction to what
we're going to be discussing today.
The market in Japan and
China has changed,
and in order for your application
to be competitive there,
you need to support Unicode.
Luckily for all of you,
Mac OS X has great Unicode support,
and we'll talk today about the tools
that are available for your application.
Specifically,
we'll be discussing how governments
and customers in Japan and
China are asking for new features
and new characters in particular.
We're going to discuss why only Unicode
can meet those new requirements.
We'll talk about some great new
features in Panther that are
only available through Unicode
and to Unicode applications.
We'll talk a little bit about how Unicode
is different from WorldScript from
what you may have been doing before and
what you need to do in your application
in order to work with Unicode.
So there are a lot of reasons
to move to Unicode for the
Japanese and Chinese markets,
but here's the biggest problem by far,
and that is that customers
are demanding more characters.
Well, why is that?
In order to give you -- if you're
not literate in Japanese or Chinese,
in order to explain by analogy,
suppose that your name is Smith,
but you spell it S-M-Y-T-H-E.
Now, you may go to a website,
maybe it's Amazon.com,
and you want to enter your
name to give an order,
but when you do that,
the website comes back and says,
"I'm sorry, in order to use this website,
you have to spell your
name S-M-I-T-H." Well,
that's pretty bogus, you think.
Why should I have to change
the way I spell my name in
order to use this website?
Well, that's exactly the situation
that many customers in Japan and
China find themselves in.
And the reason is that -- I think
it's interesting that the number
-- the variety of characters that
people use to write their names
is much larger than what has
traditionally been in the Japanese and
Chinese character sets on Mac OS.
So I have an example here.
This is five different ways -- let me
see if I can use the laser pointer.
That's kind of tiny,
but that third line there is
five different ways of writing
the Japanese family name,
Watanabe.
And you may not even think that
some of them even look different,
but all of them are different,
and there's actually a lot more ways
than that for writing that family name.
And so customers, not surprisingly,
want to be able to write their name the
way they write it on everything else.
They don't want to have to fall back to
some different standardized form of the
character when they're using a computer.
And this doesn't just
affect people's names.
For example, using the Mac traditional
Chinese character set,
it's not possible to write the
names of all the subway stops in
Hong Kong or even the name of the
new international airport there.
So it's a big problem.
There's just not enough
characters for what customers
want to do with computers today.
Governments are also
specifying more characters.
All of the major character set
standards in Japan and China have
been revised over the last few years.
There's new versions of all
of these character sets,
and they all specify many more
characters than were in those
character set standards before.
Some of them are not just specifications.
In particular,
the GB18030 character set in
China and the HKSCS character set in
Hong Kong are government requirements.
The government requires that software
support these character sets.
So in order to meet all
these new requirements,
we have to support more characters.
The problem is that
the WorldScript system,
which has been in Mac OS for a long,
long time,
can't support any more characters.
It has limitations,
and it just can't support the number
of characters that are needed.
So the answer is Unicode.
Unicode is an industry standard.
It's one encoding that handles all the
living languages in the world today and
a large number of dead ones besides.
Because it's a single encoding,
a character is a
character is a character.
The meaning of the character doesn't
change depending on what font you have.
If you've used Japanese or Chinese or
Korean or what have you on Mac OS 9,
you might have been in the situation
where you used the wrong font
and you see something like that,
garbage characters.
Would anybody like to
guess what that really is?
It's Korean, but you wouldn't know that
unless you chose the right font.
With Unicode, this doesn't happen,
because the meaning of a character
doesn't change depending on the font.
Unicode solves the character
problem because it's got plenty of
room for all the characters that
customers and governments need.
The latest version of Unicode, 4.0,
which was just released
a couple of months ago,
has over 96,000 graphic characters.
So that easily covers all the
needs that customers have,
and it covers all of the new
Asian character set standards.
Let's talk a little bit about what kind
of UniCode support we have in Mac OS X.
Our main human interface
font is Lucida Grande,
and in Panther, it now covers all of the
Roman characters in UniCode,
and all of the Greek characters.
And it covers several
other scripts besides.
Our other core Roman fonts,
like Times and Helvetica,
also have a large Roman repertoire,
although they don't cover the entire
set of Roman characters in UniCode.
But beyond this, we've got lots of great
font coverage in Mac OS X.
Our Japanese support is outstanding.
We have six beautiful
Japanese desktop publishing fonts.
The family name is Hiragino.
They're in Type 1 format.
And as you can see,
they're really beautiful.
There's an example up
there on the screen.
And these fonts have greater
character coverage than any other
Japanese fonts on the market today,
and they cover all of the major
standards that you might be
interested in for the Japanese market.
Not just 213, but also Adobe Japan 1.5,
characters that are used
for photo typesetting,
and even the complete set of
government shape recommendations
from the National Language Committee.
But we don't support just Japanese.
We also have great Chinese support.
Mac OS X,
since Jaguar has had support for
the Chinese GB18030 standard--these
are also beautiful fonts,
there's another example up there.
The GB18030 fonts have over 32,000 glyphs
and support all of the Chinese characters
in plain zero of UniCode,
every single one,
as well as minority languages like Yi.
For Mac OS X Panther,
we're adding support for HKSCS from
Hong Kong and Big Five E from
Taiwan for traditional Chinese,
and these new fonts have
over 22,000 characters.
But we support even more languages.
Also new for Panther,
we've extended our Arabic coverage.
It doesn't cover all of
the Arabic in Unicode,
but we cover a bigger
chunk than we did before,
and support more languages.
We support some of the scripts you see
here that we also supported in Jaguar.
We've also added support for
native North American languages,
like Inuktitut and Cherokee.
And we've also added a new font that
we built ourselves to cover a lot
of the symbol blocks in Unicode.
And I won't read all these off,
but you can see that we have a lot
more symbol coverage that we had
in earlier releases of Mac OS X.
Okay, this time it went.
But we haven't just added fonts.
We've also made other improvements
to our international support.
As you may have heard at the State of the
Union session yesterday from Mac OS X,
Unicode text drawing is much faster,
over twice as fast as it was in Jaguar.
We've also improved our
bidirectional support.
You no longer have to specify to
the system whether a paragraph is
left to right or right to left.
It will figure it out heuristically.
So your users can just type,
and it will determine whether
it's a right to left or a left
to right paragraph and put the
punctuation in the right place.
We've updated our bi-die algorithm
to the Unicode 4.0 standard,
and we've also made several bug fixes.
Now, I should mention that the seed
that you see here is a bug fix.
The one that you folks have
received doesn't have all the
latest stuff that we're working on,
so you may not see some of this until
you get the GM release of Panther.
We've also made some fixes to
our support for Indic languages.
In 10.2.4, we introduced dictionary-based
Thai word break.
But with Panther,
we're now adding the ability for
users to specify their own dictionary
and supplement the built-in one,
so users can now put their
own list of Thai words in,
and that will affect word break in
every application in the system.
And finally, Apple supports 16
languages for localization,
and we have an expanded
that list in Panther.
However, we've always had a longer
list of languages than the
ones we support ourselves,
so that you, the developers,
can localize your languages
into languages we don't support.
Just as an example,
I noticed that somebody released
a Serbian localization for Safari.
We don't support Serbian ourselves,
but because of the extra
languages that are available,
you can do that if you want to.
And we've expanded that list for Panther.
Well, Arabic and Hebrew and
Japanese and Chinese are fine,
but you say, if I don't have Hanunu's
support in my application,
my company is toast.
What are you going to do?
Well, it's not a problem because
Mac OS X allows you to add support
for new languages yourself.
There's two easy steps.
All you need to do is add a font,
and we have a font developer
website that you can go to to find
out how to build fonts and how to
enable them to work with Mac OS X.
And then you need a way for
users to input your new language,
and you can do that either via
keyboard or via an input method.
And we have a tech note
on how to do keyboards,
and we have sample
code for input methods.
So, rest assured you can add
Hanunu support yourself.
Hanunu is a Philippine writing system,
by the way, in case you were wondering.
We've made improvements at the API level.
In Jaguar, we introduced the Variant
Glyph Access Protocol.
And the reason that we have
that is that even though Unicode
has over 96,000 characters,
there are some ways of writing
Chinese ideographs where you have
different variants even though they're
considered the same Unicode character.
There are still slightly
different ways of writing it.
And that's actually very similar
to what you see in Roman fonts.
You can have Roman fonts
that have different ways of
writing the same character.
Some of the fonts that
we include in the system,
like Zapfino or Apple Chancery,
have multiple versions of the same letter
that are useful in different situations.
So the Variant Glyph Access Protocol lets
you specify exactly which
variant of a character you want,
or lets the user specify that.
In Panther,
we're also introducing a new protocol
that gives an input method access to the
entire contents of a user's document.
And that lets the input
method do two things.
It lets it give much better
accuracy for conversion,
and it also supports some
new human interface features,
and we'll actually see
that a little later on.
And our Japanese input method, Kotori,
takes advantage of this.
We've also made extensions
of the Japanese input method,
Kotori, to allow access to a lot more of
the capabilities that fonts have
that have been hidden up until now.
So you can now get at those
through the font panel,
and that information can be
passed to your application.
We've also improved the input menu.
For those of you who are
not familiar with it,
the input menu is the little
menu that looks like a flag,
or at least it did in Jaguar,
that you get when you have more than one
keyboard layout enabled or if you have
input methods or so on and so forth.
We've greatly streamlined it and
improved the human interface.
There's no longer a pencil menu.
The pencil menu is specific
to each input method,
but we've taken the contents
of the pencil menu and merged
it into the input menu,
so now there's just one menu.
And input methods that have been
revised to take advantage of this
new human interface can have a much
more streamlined UI and have their
modes appear individually so that
instead of having to choose the input
method and then choose the mode,
you can just go through the
menu and see what's going on.
It goes straight to the mode you want.
Of course,
older input methods continue to
work flawlessly and transparently.
There's no need to revise an
input method unless you want to.
We've also made improvements in
our input methods themselves.
As I mentioned, Kotori has much better
accuracy and a better interface
with lots of new features,
which we'll see in a moment.
In 10.2.4,
we introduced a new traditional
Chinese input method,
HANIN, which has much easier input
for traditional Chinese.
For Panther,
we've expanded our simplified
Chinese input method to allow access
to all of the characters in GB18030.
And that's a lot of them.
As I mentioned, our GB18030 fonts have
over 32,000 glyphs.
And finally,
we've added more plain keyboards
for more language support.
And now to show you some
of these new features,
I'd like to bring up Yasuo Kida and
Michael Grady for a demonstration.
Michael?
If we can switch to demo machine three,
please.
Hello, everybody.
I'd like to give you a brief demo of
the UI improvements we've been making
to the text input menu for Panther.
This is not a Panther machine.
This is Jaguar.
I just wanted to go over some of
the problems we tried to solve
with the input menu in Jaguar.
You have the US flag.
One problem we found from a
focused user group study was
discoverability was a big problem.
Non-Mac users had no idea that this menu
contained anything to do with input.
And many of them could not figure out
how to switch from US or a Roman keyboard
layout to the Japanese input.
So it was clear in Panther that
we had to improve the icons
we used throughout the system.
[Transcript missing]
The first problem is that the
presence of the menu itself in the
menu bar can sometimes interfere
with the apps menu list and sometimes
even clip portions of it off.
So it's clear that we had to bring
down the amount of real estate
that we use in the menu bar.
So let's switch over
to machine number two,
please, and show what things
look like on Panther.
Here is an icon.
You'll notice there's only one of them.
And, uh, are we there yet?
No.
Machine number two, please.
There we are.
There's the icon I was speaking about.
It's much more obvious,
intuitive to users that there
might be access to additional input
modes or input sources in there.
And it's in the right side of the menu,
so it will not follow along at
the end of the ask menu list and
cause distraction to the user.
Let's see how this works.
How can we take what used to be
implemented as two menus into one?
And here's the answer.
You'll notice that we have a
number of input sources here.
And you wonder, what are those?
They're not keyboard layouts.
They're not input methods.
They are the input modes implemented by
a particular input method--in this case,
Apple's Japanese input method, Kotoweri.
They're all there.
They all belong to the same input method.
And what we referred to in
the past as a pencil menu,
the second menu in the Jaguar menu bar
is flattened into this menu right here.
Now,
it's interesting that these input modes
have become first-class input sources,
the same level as what input methods
used to be and keyboard layouts.
They are the preferred input
source that the user should see.
and in any system UI,
they will be shown side by side with
those other input sources at that level.
Another system provided UI is a new
palette reminiscent of the pallets,
the input mode pallets provided by the
input methods themselves in the past.
And lastly,
we can bring up the international
prefs and have a look at
the improvements there.
Before we get into that,
I'd like to note that for
those applications that have
particularly large menu lists,
or if you just don't like the
input menu around anymore,
you can command drag
the menu out of the way.
And that can simply be reinserted
by this checkbox in the press panel.
You'll notice the hierarchical
nature of input methods,
and how they advertise input modes,
letting the user choose subsets of
input modes they would like in the menu.
And you'll also notice the US layout,
by the way, still has the old flag icon,
but this is being changed actively.
We didn't have it ready for this demo.
It can be inserted in
the menu and removed,
which is not something
we could do in the past.
In the past,
whether or not you were using input
modes specific to a single input method,
the US layout or the Roman default
layout always showed up in the menu,
and it can now be removed.
The input method itself can be disabled,
but the modes that would be enabled if
you were to reactivate it also show up.
You might be wondering about the
existing input methods and what
compatibility we have with those.
You'll notice that they
are fully supported.
It's completely transparent.
Choose that input method.
And you'll notice that the input
method-specific pencil menu
shows up here automatically.
The input method did not have to change,
but of course we want to encourage
input method developers to adopt this
new input mode protocol to give the
users the benefit of a single user
interface for choosing input modes.
And that's what I have
for the text input menu.
Now I'd like to bring up Yasuo Kida,
who will discuss improvements
in our Japanese input method.
Thank you.
Hello, everybody.
I'm very glad to be here with you
because I'm very excited about the great
improvements we are making for Panther.
One of the big changes is the text
input menu Michael just mentioned.
And I'll tell you about--I'll
show you Kotori 4.
There are three major
new features in Kotari.
One of them is very high
conversion accuracy.
We've been continuously improving the
conversion accuracy since Mac OS X 10.1,
and we believe we achieved a
milestone with this release.
Not only we improved the engine itself,
we applied a new technology
called Latent Semantic Mapping,
or LSM, in order to resolve the class
of ambiguity which no other
input method can right now,
which is to find out a topic
of the document you have.
Say, "I'm going to use this document to
Consider a word "hot."
If you're talking about summer,
the "hot" probably
means about temperature.
But if you're talking about Thai food,
for example,
it's probably about spicy hot.
It's like that.
I'll show you how it works.
Say, the document in the left-hand
side says--talking about
the Jazz Festival--it says,
"Monterey Jazz Festival is
the oldest jazz festival in
the world," which is true.
The document at the right-hand side says,
"Boston Marathon." Boston Marathon
is one of the most oldest
marathons in the world.
And in Japanese, both player and runner
are pronounced the same,
"sousha."
And when they entered in a
different sentence like this,
The traditional input method
couldn't resolve those ambiguities.
But in case of this new Kotori 4,
it can look at this context and find out
the correct conversion for each cases.
Socia, here, and Socia, here.
And Covert, Covert.
Please.
Please look at this first character.
This means "play," and
at the right-hand side,
this "play" means "run." It converts
the word correctly depending
on the context of the document.
The other improvement we are making
for Kotori is UI to correct conversion
errors and typical mistyping.
The first one is reconversion,
which is "saihenkan" in Japanese.
[Transcript missing]
Click and double-type the Kanaki.
Oops.
Oh, yeah.
It gets you the candidate window.
Say you confirmed the
text before you meant to.
By double-typing the Kanaki,
you can get back the conversion state.
[Transcript missing]
Say you start typing "konnichiwa"
and you suddenly notice that,
oh, this is a wrong, incorrect mode.
You type "kanaki" two times,
and you can continue typing.
The third--thank you.
The third feature is we put an
MSI/ME compatible mode for those people
who switch from Windows and comfortable
with using MSI/ME compatible keystrokes,
and also those who are using
two environments back and forth,
and so that they want to the same
keystroke between Mac and Windows.
And please note that many of
those features require your help.
Many of those features uses--fully
utilizes the Document Access Protocol,
the new API.
So in order to provide a constant
user interface for your customers,
you need to--you need
to adopt those APIs.
Deborah will mention those in details.
I'll--yeah.
Return the talk back to Deborah.
Thank you, Kida-san.
Okay, so those are great new features,
and as Kidasan mentioned,
we need your help in order to make
them available in all applications.
There are even more improvements at
the API level that I'll go into now.
One big one that people
have been asking us for,
people who've converted their
Carbon applications to Unicode have
found that there's a sticky point.
There has been no support up till
now for formatting or parsing dates,
times, and numbers in Unicode.
If you wanted to do that in
a Carbon Unicode application,
you had to use the old
Script Manager APIs and then
convert the text to Unicode.
Well, in Panther,
we're introducing a new set of
APIs in Core Foundation that
lets you format and parse dates,
times, and numbers, CFLocale,
CFDateFormatter, and CFNumberFormatter.
So now you can have a
totally Unicode application.
For both for formatting and
parsing and also for sorting,
we're now supporting many
more locales for Unicode.
And the reason we're able to do that
is that we're taking advantage of
an open source library called ICU or
International Components for Unicode,
which is now part of Panther.
Now, we're not yet allowing applications
to access this library directly.
The reason is we want to make sure
that we're capable of supporting binary
compatibility from release to release,
but that is something we're looking at,
so that may become available to your
applications in future releases.
Another side benefit of using ICU is
that our collation is three times
faster than it was in Mac OS X Jaguar.
So sorting applications
will get much faster.
[Transcript missing]
Another thing that you have to watch out
for is when you save attributed text.
A lot of the information that implements
the new features that we've been showing,
things like variant glyphs or font
features and font capabilities,
those are saved as attributes on text.
So if you save attributed text yourself
and you enumerate what you think
is the complete set of attributes,
you might lose this information
when you save it to a document.
So it's important when you
save attributed text to save
all of the attributes so that
information that the user enters,
like a particular variant glyph
that they use to write their name,
doesn't get lost when they save
and then reopen the document.
Things are pretty easy for
Carbon applications too,
especially if they're using MLTE,
the Multilingual Text Engine,
or the new HITextView,
which is based on MLTE.
That makes things pretty easy because
all of this stuff is supported by MLTE,
and you don't have to do very much.
If you use CFString for
your UniCode text storage,
support the font panel,
and allow access to
advanced font features,
and you're set.
It's pretty easy.
A lot of you for historical or
performance or what have you reasons
have your own custom text engine that's
necessary for your specific application.
And in those cases,
things are a little bit harder but
it's still possible to support all
these features and we'll go through how
you can do that in your application.
You still need to store your
text as Unicode because many
of these new features are only
available to Unicode applications.
You can use either CFString,
the core foundation class for
Unicode text or you can just
store an array of 16-bit Unicars.
Either way works.
If you have Unicode text,
you need to draw your text using
a Unicode text drawing API and
for Karbin that means Atsui.
Fortunately, as I mentioned in Panther,
Atsui is over two times faster,
so there's really no reason not
to use Atsui for UniCode text
drawing in your application.
For input of UniCode text,
you need to use the
Text Services Manager.
And if you were already supporting
Japanese or Chinese input methods,
you're probably already using TSM.
One thing that's new for
Panther is that new features,
like the
Document Content Access Protocol,
are only available via Carbon Events,
not via the Apple Events that
we also supported in the past.
So if your application is using
Apple Events to interact with TSM,
you'll have to move to
Carbon Events in order to take
advantage of the latest features.
And once you support TSM,
there's basically three categories of
interaction that you need to worry about.
One is supporting the active area,
which has always been
true for input methods.
Another is the new
Document Content Access Protocol,
and we'll talk in more detail
about that in a moment.
And the final one is supporting
input and storage of variant glyphs,
and we'll also talk about that.
And finally, as for the other,
as for the easier approach
to Carbon applications,
you want to support the Font Panel so
that users have access to all the
capabilities that fonts have to offer.
So before I go into a
little bit more detail,
I want to give a quick review of
what it is about Unicode that makes
it a little bit more challenging
to implement an application.
It's quite different from
the WorldScript approach
that you might be used to.
The most important concept for Unicode is
what's called the character glyph model.
And it makes a distinction
between characters and glyphs.
You can think of characters as the
form of language that's spoken.
It's the semantic content.
It's the way you would
speak the language.
Glyphs, on the other hand,
are the shapes that show up
on the printed page or that
you see on a display monitor.
And you can think of them as the
written form of the language.
Now, usually there's a very direct
correspondence between the
spoken form and the written form,
but that's not always the case.
It's certainly not the case
for complicated writing systems
like Arabic or Indic languages,
but there are even cases in
English and Japanese where there is
not a direct one-to-one relationship
between characters and glyphs.
And it's the job of a Unicode
text rendering engine like
ATSUI or CocoText to map
between characters and glyphs.
And here are a few examples that show
why that's a challenging problem.
The first line is Hindi,
and in Hindi between the characters
and the glyphs things move around
and in fact some of the things that
are independent characters when
they're rendered as glyphs wind
up as decorations on other glyphs.
So there's both rearrangement and
formation of clusters and ligatures.
The second line is Arabic,
and as we all know Arabic is a right
to left language and so the characters
and the glyphs are in opposite orders.
But beyond that,
Arabic is also a cursive writing
system and so the glyphs flow
together to form ligatures.
And you can't really map directly
between characters and glyphs.
There's ordering and ligature
issues that you have to deal with.
But even for Roman text,
here's an example where we have the
word "resume," and the "e" with an acute
accent is stored in character space
as an "e" with a combining acute accent.
And when that's drawn,
that has to become an accented
"e." So there's an example
of where in a Roman language,
there isn't a straightforward mapping
between characters and glyphs.
So what are some of the problems
that you can run into in an
application if you don't keep the
character glyph model in mind?
Well,
one thing that's particular to Unicode,
we all think of Unicode
as a 16-bit character set.
Whoops.
Okay.
I didn't press the bad button, so.
There we go.
OK.
We think of Unicode as
a 16-bit character set.
But I mentioned earlier that there's over
96,000 characters in the latest version.
And a little arithmetic shows that
you can't fit that in 16 bits.
So what we think of as the 16-bit
version of Unicode is called Plane Zero,
or the basic multilingual plane.
And that's where all the
commonly used characters go.
But Unicode also supports a lot of
rare and less commonly used characters.
And those are allocated
in planes 1 through 16.
And in order to represent
those characters in your text,
you need to use two 16-bit values.
That's called a surrogate pair.
And there's an example.
That's from our Hidagino font.
It looks like any other
ideographic character.
But it's stored as two 16-bit values,
because it comes from
plane two of Unicode.
So that's one issue you
have to worry about.
As we saw in the previous slide,
you can have composing sequences
where multiple characters in the
UniCode sense form a single--what the
user thinks of as a single character.
So the base character E with a
combining acute accent is one example.
There's lots of other
combining marks like that.
There's clusters in Indic.
There are ligatures in
Arabic and in English.
For Korean, there are jamos that come
together to form hangul,
and so forth and so on.
So there's really not a
direct one-to-one relationship
between characters and glyphs.
In addition, UniCode also has multiple
ways of doing the same thing.
So on the last slide,
we saw the E with combining acute accent,
but UniCode also has a single character
that's an E with an acute accent.
And that's mostly for historical
reasons and for compatibility with
earlier character set standards.
And there are a lot of cases like that.
So there are often multiple--you
can think of them as spellings
for the same string of text.
It can be represented in
UniCode in multiple ways.
So here's one example.
On the left, I have Korean hangul,
and on the right, I have the three jamos
that make up that hangul,
and they're both equally valid
ways of representing the text.
So of course,
that makes things like comparison and
searching a little bit more challenging.
And finally,
for more complicated writing systems,
you can use the same string of text as
you would use in other writing systems.
You have issues of directionality.
Languages like Arabic and
Hebrew go right to left.
You can have them in the same paragraph
with text that goes left to right.
Languages--the whole Indic family
of languages has rearrangement where
characters move around when you write
them compared to when you speak them.
And so the glyphs and the characters
are really--you can't count on them
being in the same order at all.
And that doesn't just affect the
order of glyphs within a style run,
it also affects the order of
style runs within a paragraph.
So if you have a paragraph of
mixed English and Arabic or
English and Hebrew text,
whole style runs can move around,
and you really need the system's help
to figure out where everything belongs.
So fortunately,
so that you can avoid these
problems in your application,
we have lots of APIs in the
system that you can use to make
sure you do the right thing.
In terms of figuring out where
characters begin and end,
there are lots of system
APIs for finding text boundaries.
Not just characters, but also clusters,
words, lines, and paragraphs.
There are APIs-- and I'm not
going to go into great detail on
this-- all of the documentation
for this is available online.
But there's APIs in Cocoa for finding
character and cluster boundaries,
in Carbon for finding
boundaries of all sorts.
And if the reason you're looking
for a character boundary is
in order to truncate text,
you don't even have to do that yourself.
You can actually ask ATSUI to
truncate your text for you.
You just pass it an option,
tell it how wide you want the text to be,
and it will find a linguistically
correct place to truncate the
text and add a truncation.
. character.
Because of the problems with multiple
spellings that I talked about before,
there are system APIs that
can help you with that,
that will do comparison
or searching of text.
As I mentioned,
due to directional issues,
text can move around within a paragraph.
And so when you're drawing,
you need to deal with an
entire paragraph at a time.
And there are APIs in Cocoa and
Carbon that will help you do that.
For Cocoa,
you can use the text system directly or
use attributed strings and typesetters.
For Carbon, of course, there's Atsui.
And as long as you let the system
know about an entire paragraph,
it will figure out where
everything belongs,
and then you can figure out
where the line breaks are and
draw the lines individually.
Of course, because there isn't one-to-one
mapping between characters and glyphs,
that's also an issue for moving
the cursor with the arrow keys,
or clicking with the mouse,
or highlighting text,
and there are APIs that
can help you do that.
One issue that every Unicode
application has to deal with,
unless it's brand new,
is how to handle legacy
data that's not in UniCode.
Now,
we've had APIs in the system for a long,
long time to convert between
UniCode and other character sets,
so I'm not going to go into that.
One issue, though, is to figure out what
character set should I use?
What character set should
I assume the text is in?
Well, if the character set is marked
in the document somehow,
then you're set.
You know what the character set is.
But very often,
you're dealing with plain text or
other text that doesn't have any
information on what the old character
set was that it's encoded in.
So then you have to guess,
and there are a couple of
APIs that can help you do that.
If you think it's going to
match the language that your
application is running in,
then you can call
getApplicationTextEncoding.
That will return an encoding that
usually matches the language that's
been selected--the localization that's
been selected for your application.
Okay.
It might be more appropriate to pick
an encoding that's associated with
the user's most preferred language,
because maybe your application
doesn't support that language,
but the user's data is quite likely to
be an encoding that's associated with it.
And CFStringGetSystem encoding
will return an encoding that
usually matches that language.
Now, why do I say usually?
Well,
the reason is that there are languages
that Mac OS X knows about that were
never supported in WorldScript,
that were never supported on OS 9,
and they don't have legacy
encodings associated with them.
Some of them, like Vietnamese,
do have a WorldScript encoding,
but that doesn't mean that you can
draw the data with QuickDraw text.
It's just something that you can convert
using an encoding conversion API.
Other languages, like Hawaiian,
have no non-Unicode encoding
associated with them at all.
So if your application
is running in Hawaiian,
or the user's most preferred
language is Hawaiian,
you're not going to get a sensible
answer from these two APIs.
If you're writing an
internet application,
then you shouldn't be using
Mac OS encodings at all.
You should be using the standard
encodings that are defined
by internet standards bodies.
And you can go to IETF and
IANA websites to find out about those.
And there are APIs that will help
you convert those names into a text
encoding that you can use internally.
I'll talk a little bit more about the new
APIs for formatting and parsing dates,
times, and numbers.
It's in core foundation.
You can either get the current locale,
or you can get a locale from
a standard ISO locale string,
which has a language code
followed by a country code.
You can also take information
from the WorldScript world,
like language, region, or script,
and convert that to an ISO string,
which you can then use to get a locale.
The new classes in Core Foundation,
as I mentioned,
support both formatting and parsing.
There's support for currencies,
and you can go back and forth
between internal representations,
including Core Foundation types,
but also standard C types,
and a formatted CFString.
And there's also lots of customization
options you can take advantage of.
And for more information,
you can look at the seed
release that you all received.
And the last topic I'd like to
cover is to -- the last couple
of topics I'd like to cover are
TSM and variant glyph access.
So for those of you who supported the
tech services manager in the past,
the thing that's different for
Unicode support is that you need to
create a TSM document of type UDOC.
To take advantage of the latest features,
you need to move to Carbon events
instead of Apple events,
but as I'm sure you've been hearing
elsewhere at the conference,
there's lots of good reasons to move
your application to Carbon events.
Supporting the input method
active area is something that's
been around for a long time,
but if your application is
not a Unicode application yet,
you'll also need to move to
supporting Unicode input,
and again,
GNU and Panther is the protocol
for accessing the entire
contents of your document,
and that's critical to provide
some of the user interface and
conversion accuracy features
you saw demonstrated earlier.
KotoAdi can't analyze the content of
your document to give great conversion
results unless it can find out what
the content of your document is.
So I'm going to go through
some of this rather quickly,
because we don't really have
time to dive into it in detail.
For Unicode input,
there's a single Carbon event
that has Unicode text.
It can also have glyph
variant information,
and we'll talk about
that in a little bit.
The input method active area
support protocol is pretty much
the same as it's always been.
There's just a few Carbon events
you have to handle,
and there's nothing new here.
The big new thing is the
document access protocol,
and I don't have time to go
into this in great detail.
You might think from this
long list of Carbon events
that it's pretty complicated,
but it's not.
The model is really simple.
The way this works is that it
makes your document look like
a CFString to the input method,
so the Carbon events that you
respond to are just the same
things that CFString supports.
It's really a very straightforward model.
So if you implement support
for these Carbon events,
input methods can access the
contents of your document,
and you get the improved
conversion accuracy and new
UI features like easy reconversion.
I'll talk a little bit now
about variant glyph access.
This is optional information that
comes with a Unicode text input event.
You get an array of glyph
information records,
and each record has
this information in it.
First of all, there's a range of text,
and that can be more
than one 16-bit Unicar.
And the reason for that is,
it could be a variant
version of a surrogate pair.
So it could be more than
one Unicar for that reason.
Or it could be a variant version
of something like a ligature.
For example, the Zapfino font that comes
with Mac OS X has different
versions of the Fi ligature.
And to allow the user to
pick which one they want,
they can do that via the
variant glyph access protocol.
In that case, the range of text would
be the F and the I.
So it can be more than one character.
You also have to specify the font
that the variant is coming out of.
There's two ways to identify
which particular glyph you want.
One is via a font-specific glyph ID,
and that's used, for example,
with TrueType fonts.
But it can also be a glyph ID from
a published glyph collection,
like Adobe Japan 1.5.
And the record will identify which of
those two approaches is being used.
You don't have to worry
about that too much,
because AtSuite provides a style tag,
and all you have to do is take the
information out of the -- you don't
have to worry about that too much,
because AtSuite provides a style tag,
and all you have to do is take the
information out of the Carbon event,
stuff it in this style tag,
and give it to AtSuite.
And this is all covered in Techno 2079.
I won't talk about this very much at all.
This will be covered in a session
that's coming up right after this
one across the hall--what you need
to know about fonts in Mac OS X.
This is how to support
advanced font attributes via
the new font panel in Panther.
There's already a Carbon event for
font selection via the font panel,
and we've just added
more information to it.
There's now a complete dictionary
with all the information that's
specified in the font panel,
and all you need to do is extract the
data from that and just pass it to Atsui.
You don't have to worry
about what it means,
you just basically have to funnel
it through your application.
And for more details on that,
you can go to the FON session,
which is session 406,
and coming up right after
this one across the hall.
Okay, I'd like to bring Kida-san back
up on stage one more time to
talk about our Chinese input
methods and the character palette.
Kida-san?
Here.
Let me get rid of those windows.
And let me add one more thing here.
Hello again.
I'll show you a few more
features before wrap-up.
The first one is simplified Chinese.
No, traditional Chinese.
On system 10.2.4 we added HanNin
traditional Chinese input method,
which is very popular
input method online,
and we were providing this input
method only for localized system 9,
Mac OS 9, and we are offering to
everybody on Mac OS X.
This is a word-based pin-in input method,
pin-in and both of them are input method,
and it's much, much easier to use.
I'll show you how, even I can use.
I need a cheat sheet.
One, e, e, da.
Ja, lai, ta.
No.
[Transcript missing]
The next one for traditional
Chinese is we added support
for HKSC-S and Big Five-E.
Those are additional character
sets on top of what we have today.
[Transcript missing]
Those characters marked in red
were missing in previous standard,
which is peak 5.
And you might be surprised how
many characters are missing.
And actually, this thing,
this is the name of the
new airport in Hong Kong,
Hong Kong International Airport.
And these two at the bottom,
asked names of subway
stations in Hong Kong.
You couldn't even write your
airport name or subway station
name without this extension.
And if your application doesn't support
[Transcript missing]
Our simplified Chinese input method.
We extended the input method--ABC
input method--so that it covers
all the characters in GB 180 or 30.
Um, let me pick simplified,
and let me pick the mode.
And by the way,
you don't need to do this if the
simplified Chinese input method are
revised and support a flattened mode.
Yeah, this is one of the characters
which is only in GB 80 or 30.
And the other example is Mu-Ti.
Mu-Ti?
Maybe?
Oh, yes.
This is too.
Thank you.
The last one is our character palette.
We introduced the character palette first
in Jaguar and we found out many customers
loved it and we also got many feedbacks.
One of the feedback we got is some
of you want to enter character,
exactly what you see on the screen,
I mean character palette.
Because character palette honors
the font setting in application,
usually you get different font between
character palette and application.
But we got a feedback that you want
exactly the same character between
the application and character palette.
So here's a character palette,
which looks like one we have in Jaguar.
And you have this little
disclosure triangle here.
It says font variation.
If you open it,
here's a list that lists the selected
character in all fonts in the system.
So you can browse this character
A using all fonts in the
system and pick one you like.
And if the character you've selected in
this list happen to have variant glyphs,
it lists those variants
in this variant field.
So, for example,
This is Apple Chancelary.
And you want a different A for this,
like, say, here.
A long head.
And here you have insert with
font at the bottom right.
And if you press this button--oh.
You insert the character
into the document.
Let me try a different one.
Say this one.
And you insert a different glyph.
Let me try to find one.
You can drag the character to
this area to go to that character.
Say I want Hiragino Minture Pro W6.
And here you have different
. And say your name is,
say, the one which have-- oh,
I already did that.
Say two dots up here.
You can insert,
and you now have two dots.
Also, you can track the character,
rare character,
and find which one has this character,
like this.
So now I bring Deborah back
to the stage for the wrap up.
Thank you.
Thank you, Kida-san.
I'd like to emphasize again how
important it is to support Unicode and
the document content access protocol
on your applications so that your users
have access to all these great features.
So I didn't have a prop
budget for this talk,
so I don't have a coffin
to roll out on stage,
but WorldScript is dead.
Quick Draw Text is dead.
They can't begin to cover some of the
requirements that we're seeing in the
Japanese and Chinese markets today.
We're spending all of our efforts,
all of our focus is on Unicode.
We're not spending any
time on WorldScript.
We're not spending any time on making
enhancements to Quick Draw Text.
So Unicode is it.
Unicode will give your application
great competitive advantages in
the Japanese and Chinese markets,
so you really should
focus on adding that.
And if you do that as a side benefit,
you get the rest of the world besides,
which is not a small thing.
Thank you, everyone.
So I'd like to wrap up now.
Here's a couple of other sessions,
or more than a couple,
that you might be interested in.
Immediately after this session is what
you need to know about fonts in Mac OS X.
The whole name didn't fit on the slide.
You can find out about the font panel,
and the typography panel,
and lots of other useful information
about using fonts on Mac OS X.
And that's in the Mission Room,
starting at 3:30.
On Friday at 5 o'clock,
in the Presidio Room,
there's the Cocoa Text session.
You can find out about
new features for Panther,
and all the other great things that are
going on in the world of Cocoa Text.
Unfortunately, at the exact same time,
also at Friday at 5:00 PM, in Nob Hill,
is a session on our new Ink APIs, which,
if you're interested in enhancing your
application support for handwriting,
you can find out about how to
use these new APIs to do that.
And finally,
if you want to let us know what's bugging
you or what you think is going great,
our International Technologies Feedback
Forum is Friday at 10:30
in the North Beach Room.
And we'd love to have you come and
give us feedback on what we could do
better and what we're doing right.
So if you have further questions,
the first person you should
be talking to is Xavier,
and his email address
is easy to remember.
It's xavier@apple.com.
If you have any questions when
you're done talking to Xavier,
you can also contact me.
And my email address is goldsmith,
without the H, at apple.com.
You don't need to scribble a
lot of stuff down because the
URL that you see at the bottom of
the screen-- developer.apple.com,
WWDC2003urls.html-- will have all
the contact information and all the
URLs from all the talks at WWDC.
Here are some places you
can go for more information.
There's our documentation library,
of course.
We also have a nice summary page
for international technologies.
That's developer.apple.com/intl.
If you want to develop fonts,
we have a font developer web page.
That's developer.apple.com/fonts.
There's, of course,
references for the app kit and for Atsui.
UniCode Utilities,
which is used for finding text
boundaries and comparison and searching.
There's a specialized set of
topics on Cocoa text handling.
There's documentation on CFString.
Here's a handful of useful
Tech Notes and sample code.
Tech Note 2056 is on how to
do your own keyboard layouts.
2079, the Variant Glyph Access Protocol,
it has much more detail
than I was able to go into.
There's a sample app for Atsui
and how to draw UniCode text,
and how to do your own input method.
and some pointers outside of Apple,
the Unicode Consortium has a website
for more information about Unicode.
That's the best place to start.
There's a new version of the Unicode
book coming out for the new 4.0
version of the standard and much more
readable than the standard itself is
Unicode Demystified by Richard Gillum.
I highly recommend that as an
introduction to Unicode if you
want to learn more about it.
And finally,
the open source international
components for Unicode Library has
its own website that's hosted by IBM.